Literature Review 2
================
Erik Carlson
11/16/2020

## The effect of gubernatorial political parties on monitoring and enforcement of federal environmental regulation: evidence from the Clean Water Act.

For the period of 1990 to 2014 the effect of the effect of the political
party of the governor on enforcement and compliance was investigated by
economists (Elrod, Karadas, & Theyson, 2019). Their primary data was
from the same EPA Enforcement and Compliance history database (ECHO).
They sourced the gubernatioral political party data from The National
Governors Association (NGA) and Congressional Quarterly (CQ). Their
economic data on real GDP per capita, real income per capita, and the
data they used to construct the percentage of workers employed in
government were from the Regional Income Division of the U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA).

They first began with summary statistics then employed a parametric
regression discontinuity design (RDD) approach. The non-parametric
approach uses the running variable of vote margin. They then employed a
non-parametric RDD approach, only including elections that were won in a
close margin.

Using their regression discontinuity design methodology no statistical
differences in enforcement action rates due to governor political party
was found. Though they did identify differences in the methods governors
generate compliance, such as greater number of inspections vs a greater
number of formal enforcement actions.

## Monetary Penalties and Noncompliance with Environmental Laws: a Mediation Analysis

Barret et al. utilized mediation analysis to analyze lagged effects of
penalties. They also used the EPA Enforcement and Compliance history
database (ECHO) (Barret, Lynch, Long, & Stretesky, 2018).

They first conducted Univariate and Bivariate analysis then conducted
their medition analysis, which is a series of OLS regressions.

They had four control variables, Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) releases,
past penalties, inspections, and applicable statutes.

Their mediation analysis had Quarter 1 Noncompliance as their
independent variable. Quarter 2 monetary penalty as their mediating
variable. Then Quarter 3 compliance as their dependent variable. Overall
the relationship was not found with the bivariate relations or the
regression analysis. Furthermore, a relationship between the indpendent
variable and the mediator is neccessary in demonstrating mediation, so
the mediation hypothesis was not supported. Facilities may be more
compliant for a period directly after recieving a penalty, however full
compliance after a single quarter is not achieved by the overwhelming
majority of facilities that recieved fines.

## References

Barret, K. L., Lynch, M. J., Long, M. A., & Stretesky, P. B. (2018).
Monetary Penalties and Noncompliance with Environmental Laws: a
Mediation Analysis. American Journal of Criminal Justice, 530–550.

Elrod, A., Karadas, S., & Theyson, K. (2019). The effect of
gubernatorial political parties on monitoring and enforcement of federal
environmental regulation: evidence from the Clean Water Act.
Environmental Economics and Policy Studies, 171–202.
